RFC: Split Release Process
==========================

> Status: RFC

At the time of writing, the `aws-sdk-rust` repository is used exclusively
for the entire release process of both the Rust runtime crates from `smithy-rs` as
well as the AWS runtime crates and the AWS SDK. This worked well when `smithy-rs` was
only used for the AWS SDK, but now that it's also used for server codegen, there
are issues around publishing the server-specific runtime crates since they don't
belong to the SDK.

This RFC proposes a new split-release process so that the entire `smithy-rs` runtime
can be published separately before the AWS SDK is published.

Terminology
-----------

- **Smithy Runtime Crate**: A crate that gets published to crates.io and supports
  the code generated by `smithy-rs`. These crates don't provide any SDK-only functionality.
  These crates can support client and/or server code, and clients or servers may use
  only a subset of them.
- **AWS Runtime Crate**: A crate of SDK-specific code that supports the code generated
  by the `aws/codegen` module in `smithy-rs`. These also get published to crates.io.
- **Publish-ready Bundle**: A build artifact that is ready to publish to crates.io without
  additional steps (such as running the publisher tool's `fix-manifests` subcommand). Publishing
  one group of crates before another is not considered an additional step for this definition.
- **Releaser**: A developer, automated process, or combination of the two that performs the actual release.

Requirements
------------

At a high level, the requirements are: publish from both `smithy-rs` and `aws-sdk-rust`
while preserving our current level of confidence in the quality of the release. This
can be enumerated as:

1. All Smithy runtime crates must be published together from `smithy-rs`
2. AWS runtime crates and the SDK must be published together from `aws-sdk-rust`
3. CI on `smithy-rs` must give confidence that the Smithy runtime crates,
   AWS runtime crates, and SDK are all at the right quality bar for publish.
4. CI on the `aws-sdk-rust` repository must give confidence that the AWS SDK and its
   runtime crates are at the right quality bar for publish. To do this successfully,
   it must run against the exact versions of the Smithy runtime crates the code was
   generated against _both before AND after they have been published to crates.io_.

Background: How Publishing Worked Before
----------------------------------------

The publish process to crates.io relied on copying all the Smithy runtime crates
into the final `aws-sdk-rust` repository. Overall, the process looked as follows:

1. `smithy-rs` generates a complete `aws-sdk-rust` source bundle at CI time
2. The releaser copies the generated bundle over to `aws-sdk-rust`
3. The releaser runs the `publisher fix-manifests` subcommand to correct the
   `Cargo.toml` files generated by `smithy-rs`
4. The `aws-sdk-rust` CI performs one last pass on the code to verify it's sound
5. The releaser runs the `publisher publish` subcommand to push all the crates up to crates.io

Proposed Solution
-----------------

CI in `smithy-rs` will be revised to generate two separate build artifacts where it generates
just an SDK artifact previously. Now, it will have two build targets that get executed from CI
to generate these artifacts:

- `rust-runtime:assemble` - Generates a publish-ready bundle of Smithy runtime crates.
- `aws:sdk:assemble` - Generates a publish-ready bundle of AWS runtime crates and SDK crates
  _without_ the Smithy runtime crates. This build artifact will now also include a file that has
  the commit hash of `smithy-rs` that it was generated from.

The `aws-sdk-rust` repository will have a new `next` branch that has its own set of CI workflows
and branch protection rules. The releaser will take the `aws:sdk:assemble` artifact and apply it
directly to this `next` branch as would have previously been done against the `main` branch.
The `next` branch's CI will behave similar to the previous CI, except that it runs an additional
step beforehand to ensure the correct Smithy runtime crates are in place. The process as a whole
looks as follows:

1. Make a shallow clone of `aws-sdk-rust/next`
2. Retrieve the `smithy-rs` commit hash that was used to generate the SDK from a file
   that was generated alongside the rest of the build artifacts from `smithy-rs` and
   copied into `aws-sdk-rust`.
3. Make a shallow clone of `smithy-rs` at the correct commit hash
4. Use a script to add a `[patch]` section to all the AWS SDK crates to point to the
   Smithy runtime crates from the local clone of `smithy-rs`.
   For example:
```toml
# The dependencies section is left alone, but is here for context
[dependencies]
# Some version of aws-smithy-types that isn't on crates.io yet, referred to as `<unreleased>` below
aws-smithy-types = "<unreleased>"

# This patch section gets added by the script
[patch.crates-io]
aws-smithy-types = { version = "<unreleased>", path = "path/to/local/smithy-rs/rust-runtime/aws-smithy-types"}
```
5. Run CI as normal.

When it's time to cut a release, the releaser will do the following:

1. Tag `smithy-rs` with the desired version number
2. Wait for CI to build artifacts for the tagged release
3. Pull-request the SDK artifacts over to `aws-sdk-rust/next`
4. Wait for successful CI in `aws-sdk-rust/next`
5. Download the Smithy runtime crates build artifact and publish it to crates.io
6. Pull-request merge `aws-sdk-rust/next` into `aws-sdk-rust/main`
7. Wait for successful CI in `main` (this time actually running against the crates.io Smithy runtime crates)
8. Tag release for `main`
9. Publish SDK with publisher tool

**Note:** `smithy-rs` will need to do the same patching in CI as `aws-sdk-rust/next` since the generated
SDK will not have path dependencies for the Smithy runtime crates (since they are a publish-ready bundle
intended for landing in `aws-sdk-rust`). The script that does this patching can live in `smithy-rs` and be
reused by `aws-sdk-rust`.

Alternatives Considered
-----------------------

### Snapshotting the Smithy runtime crates in `aws-sdk-rust`

We could keep a copy of the Smithy runtime crates used by the SDK in `aws-sdk-rust`.
This would look mostly the same as the proposed solution, except that rather than cloning
`smithy-rs` in CI, we would use the local snapshot. The CI for the `main` branch CI would
need to modify the crate manifests so that the Smithy runtime crates published to
crates.io are used instead of the local copies.

This has the advantage that a customer having an issue with the current release could get
a fix sooner by patching their own project's crate manifest to use the `aws-sdk-rust/next`
branch before a release is cut. However, it also has the disadvantage that the changes
CI has to make while verifying the `main` branch are more intrusive.

Changes Checklist
-----------------

- [ ] Write a configurable script to add the `[patch]` sections to manifests
      for both `smithy-rs` and `aws-sdk-rust/next` CI
- [ ] Update `aws:sdk:assemble` to:
  - [ ] No longer copy Smithy runtime crates into the artifacts
  - [ ] No longer include paths to Smithy runtime crate dependencies
  - [ ] Include a file that has the smithy-rs commit hash that's being used to build the artifacts
- [ ] Add `rust-runtime:assemble` target that generates publish-ready Smithy runtime crates
- [ ] Revise `smithy-rs` CI to patch local paths into Smithy runtime dependencies
- [ ] Implement CI for the `aws-sdk-rust/next` branch
- [ ] Update release process documentation
